[Music]
it's impossible to avoid them
for decades we've been surrounded by
sweet and fatty foods and the body has
not been dealing well with these eating
habits
[Music]
but what about the brain do our mental
health our moves and our brain abilities
suffer from the wrong kind of nutrition
we know that junk food is making us fat
but science is telling us now that it
might also be shrinking our brains brain
researchers have joined the dining-table
to study the effects of our eating
habits diets that are high in fat and
sugar in the long-term lead to changes
in part of the brain involved in memory
this is a recent field of research a
developing science that spotlights a new
facet of nutrition habitual intake of
foods high in fat and sugar results in a
reprogramming to the brain in short our
brain is affected by what's on our place
[Music]
it all starts with our very first meals
even before birth the brain is built up
during pregnancy
powered functions later on depends on
how it has been nourished by the
expectant mothers diet over nine months
a number of consequences of poor
nutrition during gestation have been
known for a long time
today scientists in Australia are
looking at the repercussions of
nutrition on brain function release
checker a professor at the University of
Melbourne examined the behavior of
babies after following the eating habits
of 23,000 pregnant women
we measured their intake of junk and
processed foods we measured their intake
of the healthful foods foods with lots
of fiber and nutrients etc and then we
looked at the emotional health of their
children over the first few years of
life from eighteen months to five years
of course taking into account things
such as education income the mother's
mental health parenting practices these
sorts of things and what we saw very
clearly was that mothers who ate more
junk and processed foods so sweet drinks
and salty snacks and you know takes
biscuits during their pregnancy their
children had more of these behaviors
such as aggression and anger and
tantrums this disquieting correlation
suggests that the mother's diet impacts
the mental development of the baby
though the link remains to be
demonstrated on the biological level in
any case release Chaka is convinced so
what we also saw in this large Norwegian
studies that the children's diets seemed
to be important as well independent of
what mum ate if children were eating too
much junk and processed foods and or not
enough of the healthful foods they had
more of these anger and aggressive type
behaviors but also sadness anxiety worry
nightmares since then professor jackers
conclusions have been confirmed by
studies in Spain the Netherlands and
Canada excess fat and sugar are now in
the sites of scientists working on the
brain excesses and deficiencies junk
food is often low on essential nutrients
so it leaves the body and especially the
nerve cells lacking
[Music]
in this laboratory at the University of
Bordeaux scientists are studying the
consequences of dietary deficiencies on
Mouse brains
[Music]
this experiment is used to measure
anxiety the animal has the choice
between exploring the lighted area or
hiding in the shade a normal Mouse takes
the time to examine the lighted area but
this animal was deprived of omega-3
fatty acids during its development
omega-3s are called good fats due to
their benefits to the heart and arteries
instead of exploring the environment the
mouse takes refuge in a dark corner it's
stressed anxious the experiment has been
reproduced many times on dozens of mice
for researchers this strange behavior
can be simply explained without omega-3
fatty acids the brain does not develop
and function normally they're needed
because the brains gray matter is 90%
fat which it cannot produce itself the
brain is the organ after adipose tissue
that's the richest in polyunsaturated
fatty acid or omega-3 so Omega 3 is
indispensable because the body cannot
make it we have to ingest it
it has to come from the diet oily fish
organ meat vegetable oils and seeds and
nuts such as almonds have long been the
main sources of omega-3 for humans but
these foods have become scarce in the
cuisine of industrialized countries
the amount of omega-3 that enters the
brain is crucial for making brain cells
more efficient because when these fatty
acids are incorporated into the
membranes of nerve cells they improve
their electrical properties in omega-3
rich neurons the signals propagate
faster the network is more efficient
depriving the brain of omega-3 is linked
to a risk that it will function less
well the general population is deficient
in omega-3 we have insufficient intake
of omega-3 so it's important to pay
attention to it especially in the
prenatal developmental period during
this period omega-3 embeds itself in
massive quantities into the brain also
in adolescence when there's often a
change of food and during aging where
the incorporation into the brain of
omega 3 tends to be less effective so we
must increase its intake
[Music]
the first rule for a brain to run at
full speed is avoid deficiencies but
good nutrients send a varied diet should
be available what happens to neurons
when meals are poor and above all always
the same that is a problem that is now
affecting the wild living European
hamster which thrived for a long time in
the plains of France's Isis region
[Music]
it's least the 1960s there's been a
decline in the hamster population which
is on the verge of extinction today and
at the same time we've noticed an
increase in the agricultural area where
corn is cultivated cow aleena Boyd
wondered whether the collapse of the
population was linked to the sudden glut
of corn so if she did an experiment
feeding hamster is exclusively corn
[Music]
wellnot salvia during greeting we
observed behavioral disturbances and
females which resulted in hyper
aggression and hypersensitivity as soon
as there was noise in the room yes above
all what we did not expect is that these
females would devour their young the
first day after birth this behavior was
observed in more than 80% of females a
dietary deficiency was enough to make a
hamster devour its children the cause a
simple vitamin a vitamin b3 deficiency
is at the origin of the abnormal
behavior when we supplemented them with
vitamin b3 in addition to their corn
based diet they expressed quite normal
behaviors and they began to nurse their
young to raise them in the same way as
the females that were fed a diversified
diet
[Music]
the case of the cannibalistic hamsters
is disturbing could an unbalanced diet
also trigger aggressive violent behavior
in humans
up surberg is a clinical psychologist
and political adviser to the Dutch
Ministry of Justice his specialty
nutrition and crime he's convinced that
enriching food with vitamins fatty acids
and minerals can reduce aggression it's
a hypothesis that is difficult to test
in normal life because so many factors
and circumstances can influence our
behavior and our impulses in order to
study nutrition without the influence of
the many parameters he chose prisons as
a nearly ideal setting in Natal on that
woman here in the Netherlands we
conducted a study of young prisoners in
8 different prisons for three months we
get them vitamins and minerals and fatty
acid supplements and then we looked at
the effect on their behavior we measured
it in two different ways first we asked
the detainees how aggressive they were
and we asked the supervisors for their
views on the issue
above all we looked at the incident log
the number of times detainees were
punished and we saw that solitary
confinement had fallen dramatically the
first link off the normal
[Music]
in the group of inmates whose meals were
improved the number of incidents was
reduced by 1/3 what we eat may have the
power to change our moods to stimulate
certain impulses but could the food on
our plate also influence our decisions
the ones we believe we make using our
free will when people are asked if they
think that the food that they eat has an
impact on health
most answer yes but when asked if diet
can also influence thoughts and
decisions very few people are willing to
believe this is the case fear a lot in
it Forsch then however at the Institute
of psychology of the University of
Lubeck in Germany professor Soyoung Park
has for the first time proven it her
work reveals the mechanism by which food
could influence our thoughts and for
that the researcher has developed a
rather original experiment imagine that
you face the following dilemma the money
on the table is to be divided into two
sums but it's your partner a stranger
who decides how it is to be distributed
I'll give you to yours and I keep it for
me
if you accept the unfair offer you leave
with a little money but much less than
your partners if you refuse no one wins
anything so what would you do do you
accept the offer and take the two euros
even if you feel cheated or do you
refuse and leave with empty pockets but
your head held high well it turns out
surprisingly that whether you'll take
the money or not
depends on what you've just eaten as
part of this study we follow 24 people
who came into the laboratory twice to
have two different breakfasts we found
that the same person made completely
different decisions based on what they
ate in the morning to the test person
the two breakfasts look the same in
reality one is far more protein rich
than the other the ratio of protein to
sugar is the only parameter that changes
a few hours after the meal the subject
takes several tests on a computer today
he accepts the offer his self-interest
outweighs his anger at the unfairness
and he will leave with the little money
in his pocket last week he mainly
refused and won almost nothing
[Music]
aunt Wendy poppin the subject having
consumed a high-protein breakfast in the
morning was tolerant of unfair offers
tol ohonta of an unfairness and aboot
via get conversely the subject who
consumed a high carbohydrate breakfast
was less tolerant in the face of unfair
offers yet on average the subjects who
had little protein rejected unfair
offers with twice as often but how can
this surprising result be explained in
their search for biological evidence for
this observation the scientists carried
out blood tests we will send the blood
to laboratory for analysis we will
measure the level of hormones and amino
acids in the blood I mean for hormones
we are interested in insulin cortisol
adrenaline an adrenocorticotropic
hormone and four amino acids tryptophan
and tyrosine tryptophan chosing of these
substances the most important is
tyrosine the amino acid is one building
block of a protein that is key to brain
function dopamine this molecule ensures
communication between neurons involved
in motivation and risk-taking the
results of the blood analysis show that
subjects with higher levels of tyrosine
in their blood are more willing to
accept the unfair offer
in other words what we eat can within
hours subtly alter the chemistry of the
brain and thus the communication between
the neurons enough to guide some of our
decisions experiments are continuing in
Lubec to confirm this result the
implications are wide-ranging since we
eat three times a day every day we
realize that food has immense power that
of modifying and shaping mankind so it's
essential to think about how we can use
food to promote our well-being and
optimize our mental state of Tinian not
only does an unbalanced diet affect our
brain functions and behavior and our
meal plan interfere with daily decisions
it also becomes increasingly clear that
diet plays a decisive role in our mood
and possibly mental health
[Music]
but what about junk food dripping with
sugar and bad fats what would happen if
we ate more of that
[Music]
this is the focus of research here in
Australia at the University of Sydney
[Music]
margarett Morris runs a laboratory where
rats are fed the kind of junk food that
you find in supermarkets or cheap
fast-food restaurants
[Music]
our experiments use a range of Western
foods of the type eaten by all of us so
we feed our rats meat pies chips cakes
and biscuits the sorts of foods that are
readily available and cheap so we are
modeling the Western world
the first consequence of this diet the
rat doubles its food rations the animal
never seems see ciated but that's not
the most surprising outcome what about
chief interests is the impact of this
diet on the animals memory and we can
measure this easily in the rat using a
task known as the novel object and novel
place tasks in this test the researcher
places objects in the rats cage the
animal comes over immediately to examine
them rodents are very curious by Nature
once it's completed its examination and
memorized its surroundings it's
temporarily removed we then place the
animal in the arena with one object
that's been shifted
[Music]
on its return the rat spends more time
examining the object that has changed
places because it already knows the
other objects they're engraved in its
memories the rats
stuffed full of bad foods behave
differently what we observe is the
animals eating a high-fat diet or a high
sugar diet or the combined high-fat
high-sugar foods were less able to
recognize to remember that that object
had moved they explored the two objects
about the same that shows an impairment
with their spatial memory the overfed
rats have not only damaged spatial
memory but also other malfunctions that
sound a warning signal for the
scientists they point to damages in the
hippocampus a small region nestled in
the center of the brain it's essential
for learning and the consolidation of
memory
[Music]
recent studies show that in humans a two
energy-rich diet also interferes with
the hippocampus we see for example that
the quality of people's diets is related
to the size of their hippocampus to the
size of their gray and white matter
volume and they're starting to be
intervention studies so for example we
see that only four days on junk food
type diet will have an impact on
cognitive functions that are related to
the hippocampus
Margaret Morris is now seeking to
understand how sugary and fatty foods
disrupt the brain of her rats to the
point of affecting their performance she
has a hypothesis namely eating too much
fat and sugar triggers an inflammatory
reaction that spreads to the neurons so
in response to these foods there's a
general inflammatory response all around
the body this has been well described in
obesity but it now appears to be quite
an acute response as well and what we
find is that inflammatory molecules such
as cytokines so increased in response to
the diet
an overly rich diet confuses the immune
system
[Music]
it responds by triggering an
inflammatory reaction especially in
fatty tissues
our fat masses release substances that
then propagate this inflammation
throughout the body neurons were thought
to be spared this effect behind the
protective blood-brain barrier the semi
permeable membrane that separates the
circulating blood vessels from the brain
so there's increased inflammation in the
whole of the body and we think that this
may spread to the brain that's because
the blood-brain barrier which normally
protects the brain from inflammatory
molecules may be impaired in fact by the
diet and become leaky allowing traffic
of molecules into the brain the
inflammation infiltrates the meninges
and then triggers a surprising
phenomenon
in her laboratory sofala has shown in
her overfed mice that certain immune
cells in the brain the microglial cells
begin to devour neurons these microbial
cells within the brain are important
because they can eat dead neurons but
when they're deregulated especially in a
situation of unbalanced nutrition they
start to eat neurons that are alive
therefore by consuming these neurons in
excessive numbers eventually they will
destroy or participate in the
destruction of neural networks that
includes neurons that are alive and it
should be functional this reaction of
the microglial cells could be filmed in
vitro the images show how energetically
they move the red objects are fragments
of neurons that they ingest in an obese
Mouse the activity becomes frenetic this
phenomenon is suspected of significantly
affecting the functioning of the brain
we've been saying to people for 30 years
don't eat these foods you might have a
heart attack you might get cancer and
diabetes it hasn't worked to change
people's behavior we hope that if people
understand that what they put in their
mouth is actually really essential to
the health of their brain and that of
the children that might have a more
profound impact on people's dietary
choices
microscope micro manipulator and ultra
sensitive recorder savvy Ottoman tea is
at the helm of an apparatus that can
record the electrical activity of a
single neuron the principle is simple
a slice of mouse brain is immersed in a
liquid that keeps it alive the
researcher approaches it carefully with
an electrode
it's a meticulous operation here I go
down the pipette in the slicer brain and
now we will approach this recording
pipette near the neuron to make contact
that's it we made contact and now we
will be able to measure the electrical
activity of the neuronal activity
electrically norm
upward Peaks that we see are potential
areas for action inform us this is how
neurons encode information the time that
elapses between the peaks is the message
sent by the neuron now we will increase
the glucose concentration in the bath
and we will see if this cell responds to
increase in concentration of glucose as
it can be seen here this cell responds
to the increase with more electrical
activity there is more potential for
action than what could be seen here
before the increasing glucose
concentration the signal comes from a
single cell but in the brain the neurons
are all connected to each other that
makes the scientists suspect that
glucose has the ability to modify the
activity of entire brain areas that
control the motions and pleasure is this
how sugar ensures its grip on our will
this is for the moment only a hypothesis
but today sugar addiction is the subject
of intense research in laboratories and
what appears more and more clear is that
the power of sugar is similar to that of
a drug
Serg odd match is one of the first to
provide proof with a very simple
experiment step 1
he raised rats giving them cocaine and
sugar
then after weeks of this diet he
presented the animals with a choice
[Music]
McClendon's of all Estoril we have the
situation in which the animal has the
choice between a lever that is connected
to a syringe that contains a drug
solution and the drug in question is a
hard drug like cocaine and heroin and on
the left a lever allows him to control a
syringe that contains a sweet drink and
there we see the animal chooses to take
the sweet drink
the rats selected the sugar-water four
times more often than the drugs it can't
be called the glucose overdose but the
irrepressible desire is plain to see
Roxette expels so this experiment simply
shows that sugar it has more addictive
potential than we had imagined and it is
perhaps even stronger than the pull of
hard drugs such as cocaine and heroin
[Music]
today we live in a food environment
that's a little crazy we find sugar in a
lot of foods as we would expect in
sugary drinks but we also find sugar in
foods that are not meant to be sweet
such as ham or soup we could cite other
examples but it's adding sugar to these
foods that contributes to the fact that
we make people addicted to it without
them knowing it
[Music]
here at the Oregon Research Institute
the influence of sweet food on the human
brain is being investigated
[Music]
what this program of research has
revealed is that habitual consumption of
energy dense food alters your neural
circuitry in exactly the same way of
consumption of drugs of abuse
Eric's dice recruited about a hundred
students half of whom regularly eat ice
cream while the others never eat it they
all came to the laboratory to drink a
milkshake inside an MRI device and give
the researchers a peek into their brain
activity craig casey so what we're going
to do today is give you chocolate
milkshake and record the brain activity
in your entire brain as you receive and
anticipate receiving chocolate milkshake
to look at the neural basis of consuming
energy dense foods the test subjects can
sip the milkshake through the tubes
without moving their heads what we found
out is that the people who never eat ice
cream you could trace the reward
circuitry everything lit up just
beautifully and it activated things very
strongly but in contrast to people who
ate ice cream every day showed a very
diminished response there was hardly any
activation whatsoever illustrating that
regular intake of energy dense foods
really reduces the pleasure you
experience when you consume those foods
the reward circuit is a region of the
brain that controls the feeling of
pleasure it is particularly responsive
to sugar consumption but eating too much
ends up weakening its responsiveness so
that at the same dose the sensations of
pleasure are ultimately reduced and
Eric's Tice's experiment reveals another
more subtle perhaps more pernicious
effect after a diet too rich in sugar
the brain becomes hypersensitive to
images of food
the more and more you eat ice-cream the
less and less the reward circuitry is
recruited when you consume ice-cream but
the more your reward circuitry is
activated when you see queues that say
you might get ice cream
so you're brought your reward circuitry
fires up when you see an ice cream store
as you're driving down the street or you
see a commercial for ice cream on the
television and the reward circuitry
activates much more for people who eat
ice cream all the time than it does for
people who don't and that prompts eating
in the absence of hunger that drives
obesity and weight gain this direct
influence of food on our brain plays a
crucial role in what we choose to eat
each day what happens in the brain at
the moment we pick a dessert rather than
an appetizer or fish rather than red
meat who is really pulling the strings
Carlos Ribeiro and his team are leading
researchers on food choices what we
really want is to find all the
components all the genes the molecules
the neurons which direct feeding
decisions and for that we have to be
able to look at very fine and small
effect the simplicity of this animal
model the fly makes it possible to
explore new avenues and new hypotheses
to understand the feeding havior of the
fly
Carlos Ribeiro has developed a machine
that monitors the insects choices in
great detail when it's touching the food
which is in the other electrode with its
tongue the proboscis then we can measure
that with the sensor here which is the
same sensor which you use on your iPad
and your iPhone to detect touch on the
screen just that here we don't detect
the touch on the screen for the touch of
the food and so we can really now
dissect and analyze the choice of the
fly sheets protein or sugar but also
when she's eating from the different
foods how it eats how much it eats how
fast it is how often it needs and really
dissect all the details of the decisions
which are controlled by the brain
thanks to this technique he's been able
to prove that the main reason for
choosing food is first of all
deficiencies naturally flies that lack
protein will choose protein rich food
but looking more closely
Ribeiro observed that this is not always
the case
sometimes actually we had some flies
which didn't have this strong urge to
eat protein and then we were wondering
why that was the case right and so when
we looked at it turned out that the
flies which had no craving for protein
had got microbes and so following up on
many experiments we could show that
there are two specific gut microbes
which when they are in the fly they
suppress protein for a protein appetite
and therefore these two microbes have a
very important influence on protein
cravings influence flies when choosing
their diet are influenced by the
bacteria in their gut this unexpected
discovery raises an important question
does the human intestinal flora called
the microbiome also act on our brains do
our gut bacteria play a role in our food
preferences at the University College
Cork in Ireland
John Kryon does pioneering research on
the microbiome he's been able to prove
that gut bacteria can influence certain
behaviors in animals as well
[Music]
when you take microbes from highly
anxious mice and Transplant them to
normal anxious mice they become much
more anxious and vice-versa
that even when you take them from normal
you can normalize the stress response in
the anxiety
scientists now even consider the
microbiome to be a kind of intermediary
a link between food and the brain the
main factor that influences the
composition of these microbes is the
food we take diet and the diversity of
the diet is really important from the
moment we're born until we die in
shaping the composition of the microbes
and so we're beginning to realize the
importance that what we eat has on
what's the in our microbes and how
that's influencing what's going on in
our brain
our well-being depends in one way or
another on our microbiome a diet that is
good for our mood is first and foremost
a diet that is suitable for the bacteria
in our intestines this has led to the
idea of using food to pamper the brain
and maintain mental health and it is the
famous Mediterranean diet but as the
scientists excited the traditional
Mediterranean diet is really high in a
diverse range of plant foods so lots of
different leafy greens and different
colored vegetables but also fruits very
importantly legumes so this is your
beans and lentils and chickpeas nuts
nuts and seeds fish and of course olive
oil olive oil is a very important
component of the Mediterranean diet and
we think that that diversity leads to
more diversity in the gut microbiota the
microbiota that live in our gut and that
diversity in the gut has been linked to
good health outcomes
we run the first study last year where
we recruited 67 people with major
depression they reseed diet tree support
with a clinical dietitian now over a
three-month period this trial took place
and at the end of that when we measured
their depression again we saw that the
degree of change in their diet
correlated with the degree of change in
their depression so the more they move
towards a Mediterranean diet the more
their depression improved using diet to
serve the brain it's an idea that's
catching on
scientists are now exploring all kinds
of clues spices used for centuries in
traditional Indian medicine are now
being studied in labs for their benefits
for mental health red fruits and berries
have awakened high expectations the
polyphenols they contain might be able
to rejuvenate neurons on the decline our
red fruits and spices
the miracle ingredients for eternally
young neurons it's still too early to
say for sure
researchers are only just beginning to
uncover the secrets of the remarkable
relationship between nutrition and the
brain
[Music]
the ideal menu for our little gray cells
is still largely unknown but a balanced
diverse diet which does without
processed food and sugar and favors
fruits and vegetables seems so far to be
the best recipe for preserving the
mental faculties my grandmother said you
are what you eat so eat well and what
we're realizing now is that science is
beginning to understand how true she was
the quarter oak light apple if we
limited the deficiencies would that
reduce crime too early to say what we do
know is that when you bet on healthy
eating it has effects on behavior the
more we overeat Snickers borrowers we
become hyper-vigilant to snicker cues
and then we eat a lot of Snickers and we
create that monster in our cells so the
best thing to do if you have kids is
feed them healthy foods and not get them
used to eating this kind of crap I can't
believe I just said crap sorry
[Music]
you